Lab 1: Demonstrate E-Mail working (Sending, Receiving, forward) 
2 
Let us consider Gmail as an example to demonstrate E-mail working. Gmail is a widely 
used email service provided by Google. It supports both SMTP (Simple Mail Transfer 
Protocol) and IMAP/POP3 (Internet Message Access Protocol/Post Office Protocol 3) 
for email transmission. SMTP is utilized when sending emails, allowing Gmail to transfer 
outgoing mail to the recipients' servers. The protocols like IMAP and POP3 are used 
when receiving emails; these protocols help Gmail fetch incoming mail from the server, 
allowing users to view their emails from any device. 
Step 1: Sending an Email 
1. Open a web browser and go to Gmail's website. 
2. Enter the email ID and password to login. 
3. Click on the 'Compose' button, usually found on the top left corner. 
4. In the "To' field, type in the email address of the recipient. 
5. If needed, add more recipients in the 'Cc' or 'Bcc' fields. 
6. Write a brief, relevant line in the 'Subject' field to indicate the topic of the email. 
7. In the main body field, type the content of the email. 
8. If there are files to send along with the email, click on the 'Attach files' icon (usually 
represented by a paperclip) and select the files. 
9. Review the email for any errors or omissions. 
10. Click on the 'Send' button to send the email.. 
Step 2: Receiving an Email 
1. Once logged into the Gmail account, the 'Inbox' can be found on the left side panel. 
2. Click on 'Inbox', 
3. New emails will be visible in the list. Click on any email to open and read it. 
4. If the email has any attachments, they can be opened or downloaded by clicking on 
them. 
Step 3: Forwarding an Email 
1. Open the email intended to be forwarded by clicking on it in the 'Inbox'. 
2. At the bottom of the email, find the 'Forward' button or icon (usually denoted by an 
arrow) and click on it. 
3. This will open a new email window with the content of the original email in the body. 
4. In the "To' field, type in the email address of the person to whom the email is being 
forwarded. 
5. If needed, additional text can be added to the email before forwarding. 
6. Review the email. 
7. Click on the 'Send' button to forward the email. 
